anatomic parts of the tooth
Crown:
Anatomic Crown:** This is the portion of the tooth that
is covered by enamel, which is the hard, protective outer
layer.
The anatomic crown remains unchanged throughout a person's life, regardless
of any gum recession or other dental issues that may
occur.
Clinical Crown:** The clinical crown refers to the portion of the tooth that is visible above the gum line.
Unlike the anatomic crown, the clinical crown can fluctuate in size as the gums recede due
to factors such as periodontal disease or aging, thereby exposing more of the tooth structure beneath.
Root:
The root of the tooth is the part that is anchored
within the jawbone, specifically within the alveolar bone, which provides support.
The root is covered by a layer of cementum, a calcified tissue that helps secure the tooth within its socket.
Teeth can possess a varying number of roots: some may have just one root (single-rooted),
while others can exhibit two roots (bifurcation) or three roots (trifurcation), typically seen in molars.
The number and configuration of roots can influence the tooth's stability and the complexity of dental procedures.
Cervix:
The cervix, often referred to as the neck of the tooth, is
the narrow region where the crown of the tooth meets the root.
This area is clinically significant as it marks the cementoenamel junction (CEJ), where
the enamel of the crown ends, and the cementum of the root begins.
The CEJ is important in dentistry as it is often the
site of various dental issues, such as caries or periodontal disease.